From The Phaedo by Plato
Crito, when he heard this, made a sign to the servant, and the servant went in,
and remained for some time, and then returned with the jailer carrying a cup of poison.
Socrates said: You, my good friend, who are experienced in these matters, shall give me
directions how I am to proceed. The man answered: You have only to walk about until your
legs are heavy, and then to lie down, and the poison will act. At the same time he handed
the cup to Socrates, who in the easiest and gentlest manner, without the least fear or
change of color or feature, looking at the man with all his eyes, Echecrates, as his manner
was, took the cup and said: What do you say about making a libation out of this cup to any god?
May I, or not? The man answered: We only prepare, Socrates, just so much as we deem enough.
I understand, he said: yet I may and must pray to the gods to prosper my journey from this
to that other world- may this, then, which is my prayer, be granted to me. Then holding the
cup to his lips, quite readily and cheerfully he drank off the poison. And hitherto most of
us had been able to control our sorrow; but now when we saw him drinking, and saw too that
he had finished the draught we could no longer forbear, and in spite of myself my own tears
were flowing fast; so that I covered my face and wept over myself, for certainly I was not
weeping over him, but at the thought of my own calamity in having lost such a companion. Nor
was I the first, for Crito, when he found himself unable to restrain his tears, had got up
and moved away, and I followed; and at that moment. Apollodorus, who had been weeping all
the time, broke out in a loud cry which made cowards of us all. Socrates alone retained his
calmness: What is this strange outcry? he said. I sent away the women mainly in order that
they might not offend in this way, for I have heard that a man should die in peace. Be quiet,
then, and have patience.
When we heard that, we were ashamed, and refrained our tears; and he walked about until,
as he said, his legs began to fail, and then he lay on his back, according to the directions,
and the man who gave him the poison now and then looked at his feet and legs; and after a while
he pressed his foot hard and asked him if he could feel; and he said, no; and then his leg,
and so upwards and upwards, and showed us that he was cold and stiff. And he felt them himself,
and said: When the poison reaches the heart, that will be the end. He was beginning to grow
cold about the groin, when he uncovered his face, for he had covered himself up, and said
(they were his last words)- he said: Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius; will you remember to
pay the debt? The debt shall be paid, said Crito; is there anything else? There was no answer
to this question; but in a minute or two a movement was heard, and the attendants uncovered him;
his eyes were set, and Crito closed his eyes and mouth.
Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend, whom I may truly call the wisest, and justest,
and best of all the men whom I have ever known.